## Triple Overextension

I can recall a handful of times in which I've burnt out from unbalancing my schedule. Today I'd like to explore how these distinct epochs shaped the way I view my work, leisure and passions.

The first example is the most severe, and actually influenced my physical well-being. I decided to dedicate a weekend to finishing an alpha release of a game project in order that it could be play-tested at an event. The night before my work session (at about 1 AM) I got an email letting me know I'd need to be available for a skype interview during a 3 hour window. On top of this I would also be at a conference so I could hear Edwin Catmull (co-founder of Pixar) speak. I didn't know my limits coming into Freshman year of Uni, so I wanted to find them this particular weekend. By the end of the day I had spent 11 hours designing and coding the bulk of the levels of GRAViTY, heard Catmull talk about creativity, and was on hold for an important job interview for 5 hours with no results (had to reschedule, ended up getting the job though). 

The combination of all these stresses gave me some of the worst head and wrist pain I've ever experienced, mostly from working so long on a laptop. Oddly enough, Catmull mentioned how errors and mistakes should not be condemned and stigmatized but instead carefully critiqued with encouragement. I found my limits and it helped me in the long term. Getting so much done in one day did let me relax for the rest of the week, if not semester.

The second instance of burnout actually wasn't work-caused but was rooted in leisure. I had recently discovered a delightful arcade-style mobile game about escaping hordes of zombies called Dead Ahead. It was the sort of game that had loops that felt like Guitar Hero or Tony Hawk Pro Skater- purified and immediately addictive. It was so immersive it felt like work, and if nothing else I was building up virtual money to buy new upgrades. When I find a challenge such as this I often get irritable and hazy, being entirely engrossed. It's in these periods of pure inactivity and removal from the real world that put me in my worst state. I once spent an entire summer encapsulated by the Sims much like this, though during my Childhood. These